---
layout: post
title:  "The future of tech"
date:   2023-08-07
categories: miscellaneous
---

- Intro: car infotainment is moving away from physical controls, but it is not necessarily a bad thing
- What is the kind of future technology that I want to live with
- "The best way to predict the future is to invent it"

While prepping my move from Vancouver to Waterloo, I looked into getting a car, mostly because I leased an apartment in the neighboring city of Kitchener, ON, meaning that I will need to commute to campus. This prompted me to research into various make and models, a process that led me to watch too many YouTube videos made by car enthusiasts that are really fun to watch but honestly not great consumer advice when it comes to choosing a commuter car.

One common theme I noticed, however, from watching all the YouTube videos, and from personal experience using [Modo](https://modo.coop), is the shared distaste for touchscreen control of commonly used car functions, including air conditioning, heated seats, navigation systems, and entertainment. The most notable offenders are the various Tesla models, whose interface beyond the necessary features demanded by regulation, is a single large touchscreen that is meant to handle all functions mentioned above. To Tesla's credit, however, their system at least seems responsive; other manufacturer's attempts at consolidating car controls onto a touchscreen are far less elegant (think Volkswagen, BMW, and Mercedes), and there are a few exmaples where the touchscreen interface is actually buggy and unresponsive, which is not only annoying but also potentially unsafe as driver's attention is diverted from the road.

The criticism of touchscreen control sounds quite valid, and I was at first convinced that touchscreen control is and will continue to be an inferior interface to traditional physical controls. My mind was changed, however, while I was re-reading Walter Isaacson's *Steve Jobs*, in which the author spared no words describing the revolution in personal computing that the 1984 Macintosh brought when it introduced the graphical user interface, especially as the product designers (aka the young Jobs himself) and engineers crunched hard at producing a desktop interface that is intuitive and polished. While I personally prefer the "open" approach when it comes to technology in general, I find it hard to deny the fact that, had it not for Apple and Steve Job's manical pursuit of human-centric design, graphical user interface would not have been the magical experience it is today, or at least it would have been massively delayed.

What I think to be the lesson in Apple's implementation of GUI, is that When personal computer transitioned from text-based command line to graphical desktop, the user interface also underwent a seismic shift from the keyboard to the mouse (Steve Jobs famous removed the arrow keys on the originl Macintosh keyboard to force users to use the mouse), and Apple engineers did an incredible job implementing the mouse into a desktop interface that really took advantage of visual intuitiveness with features like drag-and-drops, window overlays, and double-click-to-open. What's important to note is that this implementation completely abandoned the text-based command line interface, which car touchscreen control failed to do with physical controls. In other words, car manufacturers are trying to replicate physical controls with touchscreen controls even though the latter interface is probably requires another redesign of the interface; just imagine if the graphical user interface is implemented such that window resizing is done by typing a command like `resize-window --target chrome --new-loc 22,33 --new-size 480,720`.

From the manufacturers' perspective, replacing physical controls with a touchscreen comes with substantial benefits: manufacturing individual components for physical control introduces additional cost up and down the chain from mold to inventory. Physical controls are more easily broken. Physical controls cannot be updated once they are put in place. On the other hand, a touchscreen is cheap and easily sourced and software can be updated over wireless infrastructure. It feels like regression if manufacturers go back to physical control, and it is very obviously not financially or operationally justifiable. Instead, the only way is forward, meaning we will only see more touchscreen and less physical control. **The missing piece of the user experience puzzle is not "return to physical control", but rather a redesigned user interface that is more suitable to touchscreen than the status quo of emulating physical controls or iPad on a touchscreen.** I don't know what it will be (voice control and gesture are my best candidates, but current attempts all feel either creepy and crappy), but I know they will need to satisfy several conditions:

1. Instant response just like the tactile feedback of a dial, a switch, or a button
2. Intuitive and simple, preferably not requiring the driver to take his eye off the road

In a funny twist of the plot, Apple actually announced in 2022's WWDC that they were working on an actually integrated car interface (not just CarPlay), but so far I haven't heard substantial progress from that project, which seemed to me means that figuring out a good touch-screen user experience is a trickier problem than Apple engineers and product managers originally thought.

In the meantime, I have my eyes on the Subaru Crosstrek, because I am a sucker for Japanese econo-shitbox.
