---
layout: post
title:  "RSA and Diffie-Hellman"
date:   2024-07-27 23:11:02 -0400
categories: cryptography
---

Just the other day I was trying to explain to a colleague of mine the mathematics of a zero-knowledge proof using discrete log, but soon realized that after many months of disuse I've forgotten a lot of it. Hence I'd like to write this blog both to share the fun of turning math problems into the foundations of modern cryptography, and as a cheatsheet to be referenced later.

RSA and Diffie-Hellman are the two pillars of modern public-key cryptography. They were the first constructions that uses intractable math problems and provides a rigorous chain of logic that links the security of the encryption scheme to the hardness of the underlying math problems. In fact, RSA is still widely used as digital signatures for authenticating servers to clients in TLS, and (ephemeral) Diffie-Hellman is the only officially supported key exchange method in TLS 1.3.

# "Textbook RSA"
RSA is commonly taught in a college freshman discrete math class. When taught in this context, RSA is usually presented as a collection of three algorithms: key generation, encryption, and decryption.

- **Key generation**
    1. For some desired level of security (which is usually denoted by the symbol $$1^\lambda$$), choose the appropriate size of the modulus
    2. Sample two sufficiently large prime numbers $$p, q$$ and compute the modulus $$N \leftarrow p \cdot q$$
    3. Compute [Euler's totient function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_totient_function) $$\phi(N) = (p-1)(q-1)$$
    4. Pick some public exponent $$e$$ such that $$e$$ and $$\phi(N)$$ are relatively prime $$\gcd(e, \phi(N)) = 1$$. This ensures that $$e$$ has an inverse in the multiplicative group $$\mathbb{Z}_\phi^\ast$$
    5. Compute the multiplicative inverse of $$e$$ modulus $$\phi(N)$$, denoted by $$d \leftarrow e^{-1} \mod \phi(N)$$.
    6. The public key is $$(N, e)$$. The secret key is $$d$$.
- **Encryption**
    1. A message $$m$$ is a number in $$\{0, 1, \ldots, N-1\}$$
    2. Compute $$c \leftarrow m^e \mod N$$, which is the ciphertext 
- **Decryption**
    1. Given some ciphertext $$c \in \{0, 1, \ldots, N-1\}$$
    2. Compute $$\hat{m} \leftarrow c^d$$, which is the decryption

A few important remarks about this construction. First is **correctness**, which means that an honestly generated ciphertext always decrypts back to the same plaintext under the same keypair. This is true for textbook RSA thanks to [Euler's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_totient_function#Euler's_theorem), which states that for modulus $$N$$ and any $$m \in \mathbb{Z}_N^\ast$$:

$$
m^{\phi(N)} \equiv 1 \mod N
$$

Because $$d \equiv e^{-1} \mod \phi(N)$$, we know that $$d \cdot e = l \cdot \phi(N) + 1$$ for some integer $$l$$. Therefore:

$$
\begin{aligned}
c^d &\equiv m^{ed} \mod N \\
&\equiv m^{l \cdot \phi + 1} \mod N \\
&\equiv (m^\phi)^l \cdot m \mod N \\
&\equiv 1^l \cdot m \mod N \\
&\equiv m \mod N
\end{aligned}
$$

Second is **one-way security**, which means that an adversary with access to public information (ciphertexts and public keys) cannot decrypt the ciphertext. The one-way security of the RSA encryption scheme is based on the RSA assumption, which states that

> Given $$N, e, m^e$$, there is no efficient algorithm that can output $$m$$ with non-negligible probability

If the RSA assumption is true, then the RSA encryption scheme is one-way secure. 

**Textbook RSA encryption scheme** is not semantically secure. This is because the encryption routine is deterministic. If an adversary picks two messages $$m_0, m_1$$ and receives an encryption of one of them, the adversary can tell with 100% confidence which of the message corresponds with the encryption by running the encryption routine on each of the two messages.

**Textbook RSA is also not one-way secure under chosen-ciphertext attack**. This is because the textbook RSA ciphertexts are *malleable*. If $$c_1, c_2$$ are valid ciphertexts, then $$c_1 \cdot c_2 \mod N$$ is also a valid and distinct ciphertext, which can then be fed into the decryption oracle to trivially recover the decryption.

Interestingly, we can reverse the operations of the RSA encryption scheme and construct a digital signature scheme:

1. Pick primes $$p, q$$ and compute $$N, \phi(N), e, d$$ just like in the encryption scheme. $$(N, e)$$ is the public key (used for verifying a signature) and $$d$$ is the secret key (used for producing a signature)
2. Given a message $$m$$, the signature is computed by $$\sigma \leftarrow m^d \mod N$$
3. Given a message and signature $$(m, \sigma)$$, verify by checking that $$\sigma^e = m$$

The security goals of a digital signature scheme is different from that of an encryption scheme. Instead of confidentiality, the security goal of a digital signature is called **unforgeability**, which states that an adversary cannot produce valid signature without the secret key. In a vacuum it is indeed the case that this RSA signature scheme is unforgeable. Unfortunately because of the melleability, once a known message-signature pair is out, an adversary can start forging new signatures.