# Week 1 of WSLite: Playing with Jupyter, uWSGI, and NginX 
<small>September 6, 2020 - September 12, 2020</small>

This is week 1 of real progress for the Work Station lite (WSLite) project, which I intended to be a JupyterHub replica. The purpose of this project was more educational than practical, since JupyterHub is a massively more mature solution that hundreds of developers have worked on; instead, I want to learn more about the following topics by attempting a project like WSLite:

* reverse proxy vs origin server
* scalability
* resources distributed across several pieces of distinct hardware (2 or more Raspberry Pi's)
* basic knowledge of computer networking: connection protocols, securities
* basic knowledge of UNIX-like server software, especially the OS, like Ubuntu server

For the past seven days, I played around with three distinct components: a Flask application, a Jupyter Notebook server, and an NginX server, and learned the following things:

## NginX is a reverse proxy server, which is distinct from an origin server 
A reverse proxy server is a component within the server cluster that accepts requests from outside the server cluster's firewall, forwards requests to the appropriately specified origin server, and relays the origin server's response back to the client. NginX is one implementation of a reverse proxy server, and its behaviors are defined with `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` if running the official `nginx:latest` docker image. 

I still need to learn more about how `nginx.conf` is defined and what each option does. I also need to learn more about other server-side proxy solutions that might be better suited to my personal needs

## There are different kinds of network protocols that exist in different forms
With `nginx.conf` you can do this:
```conf
server {
    listens 80;
    server_name localhost:

    location / {
        proxy_pass http://unix:/tmp/app.sock;
    }
}
```
Which means that HTTP is a protocol that can be transmitted with a file on a UNIX system. I have a vague understanding of "everything is a file in UNIX", using a TCP port is not as explicit as using a UNIX socket, which is a literal file on the host system.

Similarly, when configuring `uwsgi.ini` we can specify that the WSGI protocol be spoken on a UNIX socket.

UNIX socket is limited to operate on the same machine (this is what allows a container to take control of the Docker Engine on the host system), but is otherwise more lightweight and thus faster. I guess TCP/IP is a must when communicating over a cluster.

## Some accomplishments
* I now have a dummy Flask application that runs behind a uwsgi server within a docker container. This container mounts host's `/tmp/` directory and uses `/tmp/wslite.sock` to communicate with an NginX container
* I can run an NginX container that mounts an external configuration, and that communicates with the Flask application (being uwsgi) using WSGI protocol over a UNIX socket at `/tmp/wslite.sock`
* I can also run a Juptyer Notebook server in a container that sits behind the NginX container and talks to NginX using a UNIX socket at `/tmp/jupyter.sock`


